-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Command-Line Tool: `pxcr`

The `pxcr` command-line tool realises one or more [executable images](../pxcr/images.md). 

.....

This tool depends on the [Realizor Service](../services/pxcr.md) ......

Unlike all other software supplied as part of ECLAT, this tool is also supplied as a native  
executable file (a different specific alternative is supplied for every different target). 

Having obtained (e.g. downloaded) the appropriate `pxcr` executable file for your computer, you 
can use it to realise all the other ECLAT tools. 


### Arguments

The normal arguments must each be the name of a build. Each image is realised if it hasn't 
already been, or re-realised if it has but is out of date.

An image is considered out of date if its saved module roster differs in any way from the 
module roster generated by looking at the configuration. 

This may be the case if: 

 * any module has been added or removed (especially if the available set of plugin modules has 
   changed); 
   
 * any module has been updated (or modified in any way) since the most recent realisation of 
   the image; 
   
 * the executable file has been modified or deleted (or moved). 

.....


### Target Option

This option instructs the Realizor to generate an image for the specified target (or targets). 

The `--target` (or `-t`) option takes a parameter, which must be the name of a 
[target](../pxcr/targets.md) supported by the Realizor. One additional target name is 
supported: the name `all` can be used to instruct the Realizor to generate images for all 
targets that it supports. 

If this option is not specified, the target defaults to that of the computer on which the 
Realizor is being executed (the _self target_). 



